Four Buddhas,
Shakyamuni Buddha, Namo Shakyamuni
Buddha, Namo Original
Buddha Shakyamuni.
Dear fellow
practitioners, I have been away on business for a few days. I'm usually busy with
work, but I do
n't share much with you all. Today, I
have this opportunity to encourage you all,
so I will share with
you: I went to the Northwest region, where there are Buddhists
from our Ba Vang Pagoda. When I arrived, I met some
new Buddhists who weren't yet registered followers. They came
to the Golden Pagoda and, through this auspicious connection, they also decided
to practice according to our Golden Pagoda teachings.
So, when they came back here, it took them
12 hours continuously in the car.
And so, every month they come back to
practice. Our son, who lives nearby, comes
back on the 8th and
9th of the month. What kind of karmic connection did
they have to meet and practice with
the teacher and the monks of Ba Vang Pagoda,
so far away? Perhaps in a previous life,
they must have had a prior connection with the teacher.  The
monks at the
Golden Pagoda are either those who have a connection with the teacher
or some other connection with the monks of the
Golden Pagoda, but they add a little
karma and the closeness is
n't strong, so now they have to live far away. This
makes us think of
our Buddhist followers at the
Golden Pagoda, those who live nearby.
If we don't practice the Eight Precepts
day and night, if we don't cultivate closeness and
practice the Dharma, then
this karmic connection, this merit,
if we haven't achieved liberation, we will be
reborn as humans.
This distance will cause the esteemed Buddhist followers to
still practice the Dharma, but they will live very
far away, and in the next life, they will struggle
much more. Don't think that
laziness
will guarantee the same in the next life. It's not about being
close; it's about having a strong connection. The
closer the connection, the less close it is. And
what about those who might
live far away, in the next life?
It's possible to become a disciple of some teacher or
monk. The reason is that
people have genuine sincerity, like "I'm
far away and can't come back," but they
never neglect the practice sessions, right? They
watch and listen to everything. That's why there's
a part where, if the range is within a certain
distance—that's 160
km—if the monks are practicing, there won't be a single
Dharma lecture
that the disciple doesn't attend, meaning a session
within 160 km. That's what
creates the karmic connections in
many places. It's not just about "I'm close" and "
they will be close." Closeness must be
through body,
speech, and mind, right? If my mind
is lazy and doesn't connect, because
my body is still within 160 km, if my mind is
lazy and doesn't connect, then
my karmic connection to practice, combined with many
other karmic connections, means I might be born in a remote area
or in a city, but
in some lifetime, the Dharma isn't in
the city but somewhere else, and
I value it the most.  Regarding the Dharma,
we will follow our own karma. I live in
the city and cannot return to a
place close to the Dharma. But if
I have the karmic connection to be close to the Dharma, then
I can return to a place close to the Dharma.
But my life will be full according to
karma, no less than that of city dwellers, right,
dear fellow practitioners? Therefore,
procrastination is very dangerous. It is cause and effect, dear fellow
practitioners. Nothing can be done
outside of cause and effect. If people are
sincere and they desire it, but due to karmic connections in
this life they are far away, or due to karma from a
previous life, they are also far away, or they only
know about it in this life, they hear about it, they are
fond of it, they only know about it now. Then in the
next life they will be close to it, dear fellow practitioners. Do
n't you see? When I go up there, I see that the people are
very poor.
They are very
happy to have met the Buddha Dharma,
they are very happy, and they strive to practice diligently. Even from afar,
they still strive to practice. But here, at
first, they seem to be diligent and enthusiastic, but
then they become lazy, lazy, and
then they just stop. I'm at home with my iPhone,
iPad, and TV. I can watch TV
at home, right?  We need to go. That's what's important
in Buddhism:
harmony and coexistence, the Six Harmonies. It's very
important because only by going can we
express our desire for closeness and
intimacy, right, dear Buddhists?
If we're far away, then we can be truly
honest. It's
not that being far away means we ca
n't be honest, because during
this time we can stay home, right? We
watch TV, we do many things, so we can't be
honest. Those of you who work as
laborers or civil servants can be honest. But I'm
honest because of my work, so I can't go.
This honesty is shown
when I can go. Otherwise, it wo
n't be honest, right,
dear fellow practitioners? So today, I'm saying this
so that you all understand that
we shouldn't be careless about
karma. Karma doesn't follow our
thoughts stemming from laziness and
greed; it doesn't follow our will.
Karma must be real; it's
manifested through honesty.
The law of cause and effect will govern, and we
understand it to some extent according to
our ability to think and what we have learned. We ca
n't say, "Today I'm going to A's
birthday party, and I'm being honest with
the Buddha that I can't go to listen to the Dharma,
so I have to go to the birthday party." In
that honesty, it's clear that you
're exchanging the Dharma for pleasure,
right? Then in many future lives, you
won't be able to listen to the Dharma; you'll be
caught up in those pleasures. That's what
honesty is, not saying, "I'm being
honest, I want to go, but I have to go to the
birthday party." That's not it, dear Dao Dao.
Truly, I
admire and respect what you've said above, and I also take you
seriously. If you diligently practice,
you might be able to transmigrate in the next life.
But if you don't attain liberation
and are still wandering, even if you can get close to the
Three Jewels and the Venerable Teachers, it's very
difficult, very difficult. Because the cause of
people, lies, and excuses will lead to
different consequences, and you won't
get the result of closeness. So, I
understand this.  Whatever you have to share with the community, please share it with us
so we understand clearly and boost our spirits. It might be a
little cold and a little difficult, but we must try to
overcome it. Usually, going to practice the Eight
Precepts for a day and a night is something that
our conditions allow, but we
still have to be back by 7:00 PM and sleep in that
same bed so we ca
n't be back the next morning. But if
those nearby have to go to work the next morning,
we can still go back early. If we can go back,
then we should go back. That's what
true practice is, dear fellow practitioners. I hope
you all will be diligent. As usual, I will answer questions. I also hope that if any fellow practitioners have questions during my Dharma discussion session, I hope you will raise your hand directly. I
will answer directly, just like in my
Dharma discussion sessions elsewhere. If there's
not enough time, then you can write on
paper and bring it up. I usually answer
the questions written on paper. As for the rest, if any of
us Buddhists here have questions, we can all share them.  You
have to ask directly, ask the question directly.
For each question,
Yen will look up and ask, and if
no one raises their
hand, then Yen will answer the next question. And if
anyone has a question, after
Yen finishes answering, Yen will say, "I'm done answering the question
here,"
and then everyone can raise their hand. Please be
patient, dear fellow practitioners. I
respectfully ask, "I greet you, Ms. Yen. I don't
know much about Buddhism. I have a question and I
hope you can find time to answer it
for me. Does reciting the Great Compassion Mantra help to escape
suffering, to achieve liberation, or to get rid of demonic possession?
I saw some women in my neighborhood give me a piece of
paper with the Great Compassion Mantra on it and instruct me to recite it
to drive away evil spirits, to
cure illnesses, to have good business, to have success with my
spouse and children, and to have success in everything.
Is that true? I hope you can
explain it to me. I am very
grateful for your kindness. Dear fellow
practitioners, if reciting the Great Compassion Mantra helps to
escape suffering, it means it helps to liberate from suffering and all kinds of suffering.  When
things don't go as planned,
what kind of suffering is it? It
could be being possessed by a demon, getting sick, having bad business, marital
discord, having wayward children, or
business failures.
If reciting the Great
Compassion Mantra could bring about all that, then reciting it would
result in all good results, right? Even if
we commit terrible sins, like
killing our parents, or whatever other
evil deeds we commit, reciting the Great
Compassion Mantra would end it all, wouldn't it? This would end
karma. So what are sins? They arise
from greed, hatred, and delusion, which is ignorance. If
all karma is eliminated, would reciting the Great Compassion Mantra eliminate
ignorance? Ignorance is what gives rise to
wrongdoings and causes suffering. To say that reciting the Great Compassion Mantra
eliminates suffering and the
consequences of ignorance is wrong, right? Therefore,
this is a mistake, a false view, and
incorrect. To say that the Great Compassion Mantra contains
many Bodhisattvas,
so reciting it will
drive away suffering for
us, even a Buddha cannot violate the law of karma
for a sentient being.  No, it
means that the Bodhisattvas sow the seeds
and will inevitably reap the fruits. The Buddha teaches us
the method of practice so that we can
transform the fruits of suffering and receive
blessings, giving rise to good results or
liberation. The Buddha teaches us the
method so that we can practice ourselves to
achieve such results, not that
there is a mantra that can
eliminate them. As for reciting the Great Compassion Mantra,
according to Yen's understanding, it is
very different from what most people
understand. Reciting the Great Compassion Mantra is to hope to
have many opportunities to
practice great compassion so that we can quickly
achieve enlightenment. That is, reciting the Great Compassion Mantra is to cultivate
compassion, just like in the
sutra, there is the Venerable Kasyapa. In a
time before the Buddha, the Venerable Kasyapa
vowed to cultivate patience and
compassion. When he made that vow, the
god Indra descended and appeared
as a young man who said, "My mother
is sick. I must help my mother recover.
My mother is sick. I need your eyes
to prepare medicine so that my mother can be
cured."  The monk had just vowed to practice
patience and compassion, then he gouged out
one of his eyes and gave it to the
person who said, "Oh no, I made a mistake, it's the
other eye, not this one." At
that time, the person who gouged out the
other eye said, "Compassion
must save people." Then the person
said, "No, your eye is
very foul-smelling, it cannot be saved."
That person then transformed into a pure
spirit and left. That was practicing
patience, Buddhists! No anger, no resentment,
compassion and patience. Then reciting the Great Compassion Mantra
means you will cultivate a Great Compassionate Heart.
Therefore, you will face trials from
all realms, including the human realm. They might try to deceive you, or they might try to trick
you into doing business with them.
You might also try to win someone over, someone to
help you, someone to love you, someone to be grateful to, someone to be grateful to.
That is the true Great Compassion Mantra.
These Bodhisattvas or
deities in the sutra will test you,
and they will not...  What's needed is for the beings in the
sutra to test themselves in the realms so that they can
achieve the Great Compassion Mantra
faster and more thoroughly. That's why Yen said that
monks should practice and recite the
Great Compassion Mantra so that unpleasant things
happen to them more often and quickly, allowing them to
practice and attain enlightenment
faster. Yen also knows a monk in
Thai Binh, Venerable Thich Thien Tu, right? He recited the Great Compassion Mantra
many times a day. When he was building
a temple in Thai Binh, the statue of
Shakyamuni Buddha was on top.
He finished the rough construction, but he was away. The temple
collapsed and the statue fell and broke, but
luckily no one died.
Perhaps monks should practice so that
unpleasant things happen to them, so that they can be patient,
joyful, and see that
everything is impermanent. There is union and separation,
so that monks can achieve the Great Compassion Mantra.
Yen acknowledges
that the Great Compassion Mantra has the
power to bring misfortune upon
oneself.  To be at peace with misfortunes... But what about
my fellow Buddhists who bring
misfortune upon themselves? Can they be at peace?
So, chanting the Great Compassion Mantra brings
misfortune upon oneself, not to
drive away evil spirits or demons, not to help
oneself completely, right? Cultivating compassion
requires misfortune to be compassionate; if there is
nothing, where does compassion come from?
Therefore, if someone says that chanting the Great Compassion Mantra
brings health and wealth, that
is contrary to cause and effect. Because it is contrary to cause and effect,
people misunderstand and misinterpret the
meaning. True cause and effect means that
I aspire to practice the Great Compassion Mantra;
that is true cause and effect.
Yen apologizes, but the one who gouged out the eyes was
Sariputta, not Kasyapa. Yen
heard a story
from some time, but
Sariputta had his eyes gouged out. This was in a
previous life of Sariputta,
not the life in which
Sariputta met Buddha Shakyamuni. Practice patience and forbearance.
Anyone with questions, please ask your fellow practitioners.
Raise your hand! Okay, okay, okay, go
slowly so I can give you the information.
Whoever
you give the microphone to will ask first. When you give the microphone, turn it on immediately. It's
unacceptable for those
holding the microphone not to know how to turn it on.
Hello, Namo Buddha Shakyamuni.
I respectfully ask you, I have a question for you. Please
answer it for me.
I am a young Buddhist who has been practicing at
Ba Vang Temple for a while.
But I feel that I have learned
and practiced many things, and my life
feels peaceful and transformed.
I have also vowed to practice fully
according to the temple's regular schedule, but
some of my relatives and acquaintances
have asked me why I have to go to Ba Vang Temple. They say going to
other temples is also good,
why do I have to go to Ba Vang Temple like a
slave to others? I
want to ask you, can you
explain to me what loyalty is?
I haven't been able to distinguish
loyalty from other forms of servitude.
How do we relate to each other, and if we are
too loyal to someone or something, do we
become slaves to that person or
thing? And could you please
explain to me what betrayal is? If we are
not loyal, is that considered
betrayal of the things we were once
loyal to? Thank you for
your kindness and guidance. I would like to
ask why. It means that a
person practicing Buddhism would say, "I am
wholeheartedly devoted, even
if things change and time passes, I will not change my mind."
For a Buddhist practitioner, this means
not changing the teachings of liberation, no matter what
anyone gives them. Just
like before, Yen also made
vows that even if her bones were shattered, her
flesh torn apart, her house scattered, her possessions lost, accidents,
illnesses, and all kinds of diseases, she
only asked to
meet an enlightened master and find the true Dharma
to practice. When Yen
made such vows, those things happened
first, then the enlightened master came later. So,
what is loyalty? It is the
ideal.  My ideal
is to be loyal to someone; to be loyal to
my ideal, I must be loyal to my
ideal. So, is my ideal of
loyalty
correct? I must first
examine whether that ideal truly
benefits me
or benefits all living beings.
For example, President Ho Chi
Minh was very loyal to the ideal of
national liberation, wasn't he? That's
why, even though he was imprisoned in one prison after another, he
never
changed
his path or his ideal. He never
betrayed his ideal: "I will
find a way to save the country and liberate the
Vietnamese people from slavery." He
had the mindset that slaves suffer, while
free people are happy. Therefore, he
clearly defined his
ideal as one that benefits
himself and many
others; an ideal that is good. Only then can we be loyal to it.
First, we must
examine ourselves.  First, let's talk about loyalty to an
ideal. Once you've found
your ideal, you should be loyal to it.
The second part is
loyalty to those who share your ideal and
help you practice it,
right? This is where you have an
object; before, it was just the
mind, it didn't have an object for
us to act upon. Action, however, needs an object, does
n't it,
dear Buddhists? Your ideal must have an
object. For example, on your path of practicing
Buddhism, you need a teacher to guide you,
right? If you have a friend like Hien,
you must find out if
this teacher satisfies your needs and helps you
practice that ideal.
And if the friends there help
you practice that ideal,
then you can begin to establish
loyalty, right, dear Buddhists?
And how much loyalty do you have to avoid becoming dependent? Only
when that teacher becomes unfaithful and
doesn't help you achieve your
ideal should you abandon that teacher. That means
you must remain loyal to
your ideal of liberation.  If
those good friends don't help me
fulfill my ideals, then I
must leave them and find another good friend.
That way, I won't become a slave, right,
dear fellow practitioners? It's about
making myself what I am, dear fellow practitioners.
Now, let's move on to the part about
loyalty. The part about
leaving when someone hasn't helped yet isn't considered
disloyalty. This loyalty is
drawn
from all the
Buddhist scriptures I've read,
heard, contemplated, and understood.
I've heard that
Ananda, in
the Sutra of the Buddha's Gratitude, heard outsiders
saying that Gautama was
unlucky because
his mother died shortly after he was born.
How can that be considered lucky?
Alan heard this and, even
though he hadn't attained enlightenment, he thought it was true. It's true that if you're
lucky, you'll be raised by your mother,
not someone who isn't.  Then she had to die, only then would her mother
die. That day, Lan was sad. Lan
saw it, did she see it correctly? It's similar to
our feelings when we hear something that
outsiders say. Do we feel the same way?
So, how did Lan act?
Lan immediately went back, looking very
sad, and then said to the Buddha, "I
went out there and heard it like
that, and I saw it like that.
Please, Venerable Buddha, explain it to me clearly." That
is the expression of loyalty,
Buddhists. That is the expression of loyalty.
Conversely, the expression of
disloyalty is the expression of
disloyalty. That is, when we hear
something about our teacher, we
still have doubts. We hear
something about our friend, we still have doubts, we
keep it to ourselves. We don't say it out loud,
we just follow our own thinking. For example,
Lan also thinks like that and keeps it to herself,
right? Keeping it to herself,
and many things kept to herself,
what does that become? Do you, dear Buddhists, is that doubt?
That is, Lan is still doubting, and
doubting is possible. The Buddha is...  The unfortunate person is
indeed as the non-Buddhists say, not the
Buddha. The fortunate person is someone who
doesn't understand, and that's why they
doubt, one or two times.  The
latter three are self-betrayal. And if
someone else does something that the Buddha
doesn't
have the quality of loyalty to, they won't
ask or request anything because not
asking or requesting will lead to boredom
and betrayal.
Yen Trach has made this clear to the public today,
so
Yen also seeks out those who are
loyal and those who have the quality of
betrayal. Those who still carry
the quality of betrayal within them are not yet
loyal, dear fellow practitioners. And Yen also has a
habit from school days: if
Yen doesn't understand something, Yen always asks again. That
's something Yen learned from Han. For example, when Yen
started 10th grade and first studied
[music],
when they
started learning about
equations where a to the power of n equals N times a,
Yen's head suddenly went completely blank.
Because Yen will tell you the
reason why her head went completely blank.
Because when she first entered first grade, they
assigned her to be class
president. At that time, it was at
Yen's school...  That class only
had five or six students, but at another school, they
tricked the older students into going there, and there was already a class
president from another class. So
when the homeroom teacher decided on a class
president, they elected
that other student, meaning the whole class voted for that student.
The homeroom teacher didn't know Yen at
all, she just picked her based on her background.
And Yen chose Yen. Yen was
new to the class, and before the class president election, she
saw that the students were all close friends,
so she became class president. What
Yen said is the truth. Being
class president for several years, from elementary to
middle school, was so tiresome and frustrating. She tried to
resign many times but couldn't. Then, in
high school, the teacher asked, "Who joined the
Youth Union?" Yen raised her hand, meaning no. Raising her hand
to refuse meant she was afraid of being assigned to be
class president. In short, being class president meant being a burden, nothing good came of it, it was
very miserable. So
she absolutely refused. No
more talking, Yen raised her hand, no decision, then put her
hand down. Then the teacher read out...
She also had Pham Thi Yen, and at that time,
she had to raise her hand. The teacher
then designated
Pham Thi Yen as class president. The whole class was in a state of shock.
That's the psychology of you all, right? It was
extremely
stressful. Then, during the
class meeting, Yen remembered that during the first class meeting, the
class president had to be called up.
Hien stood up and immediately said, "I did
n't do anything." Then Hien
said, "Now, the teacher has assigned
me to be class president. If you don't
agree, tell the teacher. I do
n't want to be class president.
If you can't, let me be
in the class." In short, I had the
courage because I had done it before, and the
class was very quiet. Because of that, the
teacher assigned to teach Yen's class was a very
good teacher. He only taught for a
while, not
officially. But because he was a
good teacher, when he lectured
on a to the power of n and N times a, I was completely stumped.
The teacher analyzed it.  If I don't understand, I
just have to look at the teacher. Then the teacher asks if I understand, and I
shake my head. When the
teacher explains again, I shake my head again, meaning I'm completely stuck and ca
n't understand anything.
In the end, the teacher has to explain it five or seven
times before I understand and nod. That's why
I have this habit of asking the
person who explained it to me if I do
n't understand, from elementary school to middle school. So I never have any sense of obligation towards my teachers. If I don't
understand something, I keep it to myself and think, "The teacher
isn't good, their
explanation is difficult to understand."
So, loyalty
is the element of asking someone again when you
don't understand something, until you get a
satisfactory answer. Or if it's not
satisfactory, you have to say, "
I'm not satisfied with this," so they know.
That's loyalty, dear Buddhist followers. That's why I
am
very loyal to my teachers.  My friend and I,
Yen, have chosen someone, and Yen is very loyal
to that person, not harboring doubts or making assumptions about them.
That is, the doubts haven't been fully explained by the other person,
right? Therefore, from
our own thinking, we make assumptions about
others. Suspicion of others is a sign
of disloyalty. Let's test
what loyalty is: it's about being
completely open and honest, but not being subservient.
Loyalty without subservience means that
after asking questions and not receiving a
satisfactory explanation, you say, "
This matter is not satisfactory," and
repeatedly,
you reply, "Sir/Madam,
I am not satisfied with what you have said,
so I must go
elsewhere." The person you leave is
also happy, right?
They see that you haven't satisfied them and let
them go, but
they remain a good friend, and you remain a
good friend to them. The meaning
here is loyalty, not being completely faithful,
but being loyal in some way. Loyalty, right? It
means not speaking ill of each other.  We're still good to
each other, right? Gradually transition
from a teacher-student, friendly relationship to a
life partnership, do you understand, dear Buddhists? Because
the element of Loyalty brings forth a
genuine feeling, so people
become good friends in life,
without any intention of harming or betraying each other.
Do you see, dear Buddhists? Therefore,
all elements belonging to our hearts
must be made clear so that we can
practice them and become a
good person and achieve perfection.
If we don't know, we won't
become a good person. Because before, if
we didn't understand certain elements, we would
harbor them in our hearts, thinking them up ourselves,
right? And many of those elements
we think up ourselves, but others do
n't understand them—that's wrong, right? But to tell others that they're wrong is not good, is
it, dear Buddhists?
So, the element of Loyalty
is that if someone has questions or needs
clarification, they
should ask. For example, if our teacher is explaining something to
us and we don't understand, we should
ask until we get to the bottom of it, right? Yen Trach Dharma
with you, dear Buddhists.  If our fellow practitioners have anything they don't
understand, we ask until we understand, and we
share everything until the very end.
If we understand, we understand; if not, we
understand. So, are we close to each other,
not distant, not speaking ill of each other,
not harming each other? That's the issue of a
loyal and esteemed fellow practitioner.
Therefore, when interacting with someone,
we see that they reveal everything
to us, and we reveal everything
within their sphere to them—that
is, two spheres interacting, from how we adjust and
correct—that is called the teacher-student relationship, the friendship between a
female and male, with loyalty and devotion. Buddhist practitioners, do you understand?
To
become a loyal and faithful person,
we will become a
truthful person, and it is this element of a truthful heart that
leads us to the right path,
Buddhist practitioners, and we will encounter the true
Dharma. Those with evil hearts cannot
encounter the true Dharma
and easily stray from it, abandoning their ideals,
abandoning their friends, their
teachers, and their good companions.
Therefore, through this sharing,
Buddhist practitioners, let's try...  Check yourself to see if
you have the element of Loyalty, or if you
still harbor many elements of betrayal—
betrayal of the enlightened teacher you've accepted, the
kind friend you've chosen, the ideal you're
following. Loyalty is so
broad yet so subtle,
and when you truly experience it, you
benefit from it, right? You live
with everyone, you bring benefits to them,
and you treat
everyone equally, considering them all
as family. For example, if
you ask a teacher a question repeatedly, and they do
n't answer, then the genuine and
sincere feelings for each other still exist, right?
You say, "Okay, I'm going to this place to learn the
Dharma." Once you've learned the Dharma,
you still come to discuss it
with them. Even
though you have a relative, and you've seen many people
oppose Venerable Thich Thong
Lac, that friend
of yours practices with him. You and
your friend have very
frank exchanges; you practice together and
express your views on the
practice.  So, Yen and her friend still
share their views on spiritual practice normally, without
encroaching on their friendship. As long as they
express everything they think
and exchange ideas, their feelings remain
intact.
Even though their views on spiritual practice differ, they maintain a close relationship.
Now, after a
very long time, they are still in contact, still close,
still friends. Now, she is attending a
Buddhist secondary school and a Buddhist college.
She has become the abbess of a temple,
and since then, Yen has continued to rely on Yen's group to help with
funeral arrangements for her mother. The Buddhist followers from
Ms. Phuong's group, Ms. Mai's group, and
all our fellow practitioners in the Buddhist community have come to
help. Even now,
Ms. Phuong's temple still allows her followers to come on
holidays to cook meals. Their friendship remains
strong because of the honesty and
sincerity involved. As for spiritual practice, each
person has their own circumstances, but initially, they practiced
together and shared everything. Later, back when
Yen hadn't yet followed Christ,
Yen and her friend practiced together, and her friend followed Christ.
Teacher Thong Lac and Yen still followed the
previous path, and later
shared their views on practice freely.
Yen expressed her opinions, and now she expresses hers, but their friendship
remains, and they understand
each other's feelings. When she returned to
this place, she no longer followed Teacher Thich Tong Lac;
she went to study Buddhist higher education, and they
still shared normally without any
objections. So, can we maintain loyalty and sincerity? Being honest and
faithful to each other is what creates a
very good kind of loyalty, not a form of slavery.
So, let's ignore that
idea. We will resolve the
issue of whether loyalty is slavery or
not. How can we be loyal
without becoming a slave? Thank you, that's a
very good question.
There's a question from you all. Namo
Buddha Shakyamuni. I respectfully ask you,
sister, and all the congregation,
that we have been guided to
the faithful to take refuge
in the Three Jewels, and taking refuge in the Three Jewels at
Ba Vang Pagoda...  It is known that
currently in Vietnam there are many temples also
called the Three Jewels. So why should we take
refuge in the Three Jewels? I
respectfully request that you explain this to
us so that we know how to
share and guide others to understand
this issue better. I thank you for
your merit. The
question I just asked, Yen answered
relatively well, but it wasn't entirely clear.
The meaning of taking refuge is in the sense of taking
refuge. So what is taking refuge? What is taking
refuge and what is not taking
refuge? When we take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the
Sangha, we are taking refuge in the
Buddha, which means we are taking refuge in the Buddha. So
what is taking refuge? Some people say, "
I am practicing Buddhism, so I take refuge in the
Buddha, in the Three Jewels, in the Dharma, and in the Sangha."
So, taking refuge in the
Buddha means taking refuge in
our own enlightenment. That means,
whatever we hear, we contemplate it. That is taking
refuge. Dear Buddhists, do you
understand this point? The sign of someone taking
refuge in the Three Jewels is hearing
anything...  Everything requires thinking, a kind of
thinking, because the Buddha taught that
enlightenment must go through thinking.
The foundation and the Dharma mean that no matter what
problems arise in the family or
relationships, or if there are doubts about how to handle them,
we must rely on the
Buddha's teachings. Buddhists, do you understand? Many people go to fortune
tellers, relying on the words of
some fortune teller, not on the
Buddha's teachings. Even
those who take refuge in the Buddha still go to fortune tellers;
that's
not relying on the Buddha's teachings. People who go to fortune tellers don't rely on just
one fortune teller, right?
Then, relying on the Sangha—that means following the
Sangha
to listen to the teachings and explanations of the
Buddha's doctrine. That means we must have
everything we need to be considered to be relying on the Sangha, dear fellow
practitioners. Usually,
we don't do that. For example, Buddhists
at the Golden Temple learn and
understand...  The things about the monks later on, when
we share them with each other,
that means we are also taking refuge in the Three Jewels, okay? And then there's
the question of why we take refuge in the Three Jewels at Ba Vang Pagoda. Regarding the Buddha Jewel, the Dharma
Jewel, and the Sangha Jewel, I've already answered that in the previous question. So, what is the Sangha Jewel? That's why we take refuge in the Sangha Jewel at Ba
Vang Pagoda. Because we are
people, if we advise
others, we ask, "Have you heard the
master's Dharma teachings?" "Yes, I have," they say. "Do
you think it's right?" "Yes," they say. So, do
you
think the master can help you with
many things in Buddhism? "Yes," they say. Then, if you
have any problems,
you must take refuge in the Three
Jewels at Ba Vang Pagoda. If you have any
difficulties or problems, you will be guided and
helped by the masters.
That's called taking refuge in the Three
Jewels at Ba Vang Pagoda. In the country
or in the world, there are many Three
Jewels, but which disciple can find them all?  The
teacher
there is someone we rely on, the Three Jewels, but in
reality, we are relying on the Sangha. Do you all
agree? Because if we don't
hear the Dharma teachings from the Sangha,
how would we understand it? We don't understand,
but relying on the Three Jewels is actually relying on the
image and the Sangha. To rely on the
Three Jewels, we must find a
monk who is
wise and knows how to teach us. A monk who
practices but doesn't know how to teach, or
someone who knows how to practice but doesn't know how to
teach, might be like someone who says, "I can practice, but I'll teach you my own
things, and you can't do them." It's like
someone who knows how to eat
but doesn't know how to feed
their child, right? Someone who knows how to eat to fill their own stomach but
doesn't feed
their child, giving them their own food instead, causing the child to choke. So,
there are monks who have
attained the Buddha's teachings and practiced,
but when they teach, they don't
understand the capacity of the questioner, they don't understand the
vast capacity of
sentient beings, so they teach what they
practice, which sentient beings ca
n't digest.  For example, a
lay person practicing the Dharma of a
monastic, like a child
eating rice, can't digest it, their
stomach ruptures, and they die, right?
There are some
Buddhists like this: Yesterday, Yen
went out for work and went with
Mai. Yen explained to Mai that
she didn't eat breakfast, but she didn't eat dinner. Mai said, "
It's not that you don't eat,
but you're not gaining merit or blessings, you're suffering the consequences, and
you're committing evil deeds against yourselves.
Why? Because if you don't eat, your body will decay, and if your
body decays, you'll lose your life. If you lose your life,
you can't practice
because you're a lay person." Yen
explained, "Let's stop here.
Mai is embarrassed again. It's
okay, we are lay people,
we are in the practice of reducing suffering,
that is, the five precepts.
Not killing living beings doesn't mean not
eating meat.
Even living beings have made mistakes before, very mistakes."  It's a mistake for Buddhists to
understand, that's why Buddhist teachings can't enter the world.
But here, Yen is explaining the
part that's being taught to Buddhists who don't understand it,
so they can't digest it, causing Buddhist
teachings to wither away. In the
world, a lay disciple is someone who doesn't
kill, steal, or commit adultery, right?
Not being drunk or addicted is what truly means not being drunk or addicted.
But if you
can still drink, you can
still be drunk, not addicted, and not commit adultery, meaning you still have lustful desires. It's not that you're
forbidden from lustful desires. It's not that you're forbidden from
killing, it's not that you're forbidden from
eating the flesh of dead beings.
It means we're gradually reducing our karma.
With the Buddha's wisdom, the Buddha sees that lay
people like that can
gradually reduce their
karma. That's enough for
lay people to enjoy the happiness of being
lay, to transform
karma, and to live a peaceful life at home.
All such lay people can
live in the world; they don't
kill, but they live among evil people,
so some people kill. It's not that
everyone doesn't kill, so they eat
food.  Those who have killed living beings
suffer the karmic consequences of intentionally and deliberately
eating the flesh of living creatures, and they
also suffer the consequences of lust. Lust also leads to the karmic consequences
of indulging in the pleasures and
sensations
of
sensual desire, right? They suffer karmic consequences, but
they are still reborn in a
good realm, not an evil one.
They can still continue practicing the
Dharma, and lay people can still attain the
fruit of enlightenment. If they practice
seriously, they can still achieve a lower level of liberation.
Do you understand this point, Buddhists? So
now, if you absolutely do not kill living beings,
but still have
lust, you still suffer the karmic consequences of
lust. That means you are still in the world, and you are
already skewed, right? If you don't, if you
eat vegetarian food completely,
you still have
merit, but in the present moment, in
your family, you will cause chaos,
and you will suffer the karmic consequences. Therefore, the Buddha is
very wise; don't think you can surpass the Buddha by simply
eating
vegetarian food. Being a Buddhist means you must be a vegetarian; only then will you be able to be a Buddhist.  It's better to be vegetarian
now, not like that. If the
family is harmonious and someone is sick, then
vegetarianism is good and valuable. Being vegetarian is good and precious, but it must be in
harmony with the family, right, dear
Buddhists? Only then will we not suffer the
karmic consequences from those around us who criticize
Buddhism. Such bias
prevents Buddhism from developing;
it's a karmic consequence that limits the
development and propagation of the Dharma.
For example, a Buddhist disciple
has to work, has to travel, and therefore
has to drink alcohol, right?
But you shouldn't get drunk or addicted. A
monk, on the other hand, shouldn't even
sip alcohol because they have
practiced the path to liberation, while we are only now
beginning to reduce suffering. Therefore, those
who travel for work no longer have those
relationships, so they live separately.
People say they are critical and
consider Buddhism to be something strange,
a distortion of the world.
But Buddhism truly lives with the
world, making the world very peaceful and
happy. Therefore, the disciple...  Buddhists
accept the idea of ​​eating without killing. If they find
something to eat at the market, they eat it; if they are killed, they eat vegetables,
beans, and fruits, which are very
normal. This means that within it, there is still a reduction in
attachment to taste and aroma. They have a reduction
in desire, just as they have a reduction in lust—not explicit sexual desire, but
still explicit sexual desire. The
Buddhists of that time were mistaken. In the
early days, our master still taught the Dharma, saying he didn't force us to be vegetarian. From the very
first day we went to the temple, he maintained the
view that he didn't force us to be
vegetarian; he only taught us not to
kill. If anyone listened to the
Dharma from beginning to end, he still
consistently maintained that view,
right? We see that there are enlightened masters,
so we still get our
hair permed because we still have
worldly affairs, weddings, and other worldly matters.
Many things at home require
relationships; we still have to apply
makeup, dress up, and check our appearance. Only then can
we live in this
world. We still have to be wives,
husbands, fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters,
bosses, employees. We
must live in this world and within the worldly laws,
reducing karma, which is
explained by the Buddha through his wisdom,
leading us to happiness, isn't that right,
dear Buddhists? That's why there are some
teachers who are teachers but don't know how to preach the
Dharma. Their preaching destroys the Buddha's teachings,
preventing sentient beings from practicing and
suffering, causing them to
quarrel. That kind of teacher isn't
truly a saint, is it?
Such teachers aren't truly saints. In
temples, there are many Three Jewels, but some
teachers can practice the
Dharma but cannot preach it to save sentient beings. However,
there are teachers who can
practice the Dharma themselves and preach it to save sentient beings.
But if you haven't preached to save sentient beings
according to their capacity, you are not yet a
complete teacher who brings benefit to
sentient beings through the Dharma.  The Buddha is
like a doctor, but this teacher is
like a doctor who
gives people the wrong medicine, and they ca
n't practice it. There are Buddhists, because lay
Buddhists still have many attachments. For example, I have
n't let go of my possessions, I
skip meals, right? I have to work every day to
earn money. My husband,
my wife, my house, my property, my relatives,
so many things that belong to me.
This meal is earned with my own money;
I didn't steal or rob, I didn't
kill any living being. Why not eat instead of
letting this body... This person is
slowly committing suicide, right? And we are committing a crime against a living
being,
killing this living being to take its life. So
this person is practicing suicide, right?
Suicide then causes social disorder,
family disorder, and lineage disorder.
Such things are wrong. It's
like a doctor bringing
food to eat and then throwing it into
a newborn baby. Clearly, I eat the food, but
you can't eat it? Then the baby
dies, and they don't know why. Those who
follow him...  The disciples of those teachers... then, when
time comes, Yen will explain that
there are too many teachers and some lay people
online teaching about the Four Foundations of Mindfulness,
and they don't limit who listens.
Some Buddhists like that find it
very difficult to practice
because they practice
the method of eradicating greed, anger, and
attachment. But when they are outside, they
have to practice officially
in life, which means they still have desires for material possessions
and relationships, that is, they still have attachments, they still
want their spouses to be happy, their siblings to be
happy, right? That's attachment. They
still have desires, but in the law of karma, they get what they want.
But on the other side, they sit in
meditation, contemplate, and practice the method of eradicating all of that. Then, a little later, they
still want to practice the method they are
hoping for, without contemplating. From
this point, it tears apart the
minds of Buddhists. For example, if at night they take their pillow
to the second floor to sleep, but their wife doesn't sleep, their wife doesn't sleep, their
wife doesn't sleep, their
wife sleeps – that's called greed.  If you can't
sleep with your wife, you argue, going up and down the
stairs four or five times, unable to decide whether to
go up or down, your mind is confused.
That's why, when you sit down to meditate to cultivate and break free from those thoughts, you think, "
Yesterday I already slept with my wife," and then you
think back, "Yesterday I was so greedy, how did I get so carried
away?" Then you remember everything, and you've lost your cultivation,
right? So, this guy ca
n't digest what he's
learned, right? Therefore, you must learn
methods that are suitable for you. What I'm
saying is practical, isn't it, dear fellow
practitioners? Oh no,
this month I slept with my wife three or four times,
I was greedy, and I didn't sleep with her, she's all angry. Then, when you
sit down to meditate, you
can't think of anything else, you only think, "
I was greedy," and the scene of lust
reappears, you lose your meditation.
That's the truth. What I'm
saying is just the truth, it's practical,
right? And for those who have already broken free from
the Dharma, even a single thought of
lust must be contemplated and
purified until it's all over, then every day...  It's
always like this, do you all understand
this? Their minds are very stable in their practice of
peace and tranquility. But this guy is
tearing things apart. He's already mentally ill. That means he's
harming his nerves.
His delusions always lead him back to the right path, right? When he's
lustful, he fantasizes about the
moment of death. Then tomorrow he'll be
lustful again. That means even
during lust, he doesn't experience
worldly happiness; two souls are still
fighting. He doesn't get to enjoy
anything, does he? He does
n't get to experience the happiness of liberation, nor
worldly happiness. He doesn't get to
enjoy anything at all. He becomes a
person who contradicts himself. That's why
learning about the Dharma online
isn't easy, and teaching people is
n't something you can do without skill. It's
not that you can teach everything you
know. You teach what
you know. Who should read
these articles? Those who
should
read them and those who shouldn't. Those who should or shouldn't
practice what they read should listen to learn but not practice.
If you practice, what will the results be?
That's why they teach indiscriminately,
using the title to teach, teaching to gain
fame, and so on. They don't limit the audience,
who the listeners are. In real life, people have a
target audience: this is class 1, this is
semester one, this is semester two, is there a target audience like
class two, semester one, semester two.
That means anyone in class 1 comes here. But in Buddhism, they
teach indiscriminately. Laos teaches the Four Foundations of
Mindfulness meditation, but in that place,
Yen sees only lay people
practicing so deeply. How can they practice?
We only point out a certain level of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness for lay
people to practice, and at
what level lay people can no
longer enter? If you know, if you enter, you will
not be able to practice; your mind will become confused.
We Buddhists know that for
lay people, the path to practice
this Dharma is extremely difficult. Therefore,
we must become monks and nuns to practice the
liberation methods; it will be easier to attain enlightenment and reach
the fruit of liberation. Therefore,
lay people must be self-reliant.  Adjust your approach and
choose the teaching plan you prefer to practice. If you
choose a layperson's plan, then after
selecting it, diligently practice
listening to the Dharma and practicing. If you choose a
monastic's plan, then diligently
practice the monastic's plan. Don't
choose a layperson's plan, as that will lead to
suffering and greed, right, dear
Buddhists? That's why I'm explaining this: there are
many Three Jewels, some of which are
not truly the Three Jewels
because the monks have made mistakes in their practice. But
there are also Three Jewels where the monks practice
well, but they practice only for themselves and
lack the opportunity to guide others, so they don't know the
capacity of sentient beings to preach the Dharma,
causing sentient beings to choke on
the teachings, right? Because they can't digest that knowledge, even if they consume it, it
becomes suffering. So
why do we Buddhists take refuge
at Ba Vang Temple? Because we ourselves
realize that here we learn the
Buddha's teachings, and those teachings are relevant
to our current lives, helping us
resolve our suffering.  In
our present lives, we
practice minimizing suffering and
we attain happiness. This is the Dharma that
has been and is being taught by
our teachers, that we have
heard and are hearing, right?
Then, when we become monks,
we will be disciples of the Buddha.
We will see our monks, we will
have methods of practice, right? With
three robes and one bowl, practicing meditation,
we will aim for
renunciation, like the seventh enlightenment. Although we are
in the secular world, we are not
tainted by sensual pleasures. That means we must
practice the five precepts and the Dharma, knowing how to practice the precepts and the
eight bowls. Even as sons, we must always aim for renunciation and liberation. If in this life we ​​are complete and can sever all attachments, then we will renounce. If not, then in the next life. Therefore, we truly rely on the Three Jewels of Ba
Vang Pagoda; that will bring
us happiness. But if elsewhere the Dharma is preached and
doesn't solve
our present problems, then we cannot maintain our
minds.  I'm going to go see a
fortune teller right away, right? I'm going to see a shaman
right away, right? It's impossible to rely on the Three Jewels (Buddha, Dharma,
Sangha). Therefore, some temples are not truly the Three Jewels when the monks don't personally penetrate the Buddha's teachings and don't bring the Buddha's teachings to each individual's capacity so that they can practice and overcome suffering. So, that's not called the Sangha,
right? Because it must bring the Buddha's teachings to
me so I can practice and
resolve my suffering. Only then can it be called the Dharma. The Sangha must bring the Dharma to save
sentient beings to be called the
Sangha, right, dear
Buddhists? Or the monks must practice the
Buddha's teachings to achieve liberation, and once
liberated, they can solve
our problems. Those are two things that are reversed,
right? That's why
we Buddhists see this clearly through the
experience of our
own lives. That's why we rely on the Three Jewels, right? Do
you have any questions?
Namo Buddha Shakyamuni. I respectfully
ask Ms. Yen, I am Trieu Anh.
Regarding the matter of addressing Ms. Yen, we can simply
call her "Ms." Yen can have
many meanings, such as "Ms." Yen, or "
Ms." Yen can be used to address older people, like younger siblings, and even
younger people. However,
please don't use "child" when addressing monks and nuns. "Child" is only used
with monks and nuns, but "
child" is acceptable with those younger than Yen. Please
note, dear Buddhist followers. I respectfully address Ms.
Yen as a layperson from room one, having been at the
temple for over a year.
I have listened to the Dharma teachings of the teacher and Ms. Yen and have gained
much understanding. First,
I would like to express my gratitude for the merits of the
teacher and Ms. Yen. Second, I would like to ask Ms. Yen
a question: Regarding Right View, avoiding right thinking,
and right mindfulness, I haven't been able to
clearly distinguish
between these three issues. I would like to ask Ms. Yen to explain them to me and the congregation so we can understand them better. My
second question is,
when I want to dedicate merit
to a deceased person, and that deceased person is
not...  Is it okay if we know each other?
And if we do, or if we have a karmic connection,
or if I want to dedicate the
merit to someone who is still alive, is that
possible?
Thank you. Regarding your question about Right View,
Right Thought, and Right Mindfulness, which are part of the Eightfold Path,
the teacher has already
explained the Eightfold Path many times, but
he hasn't given a full lecture on it. So, I
'll answer like this: it's just a
brief answer. Buddhists,
we take right view.
What is right view? What is wrong view?
In Buddhism, we take
the good part and cultivate it in
our hearts. There is good and evil, right? There is
right and wrong. As
Buddhists, we
should prioritize good to suit
our practice. Right view of
liberation is about suffering, its
causes, and the way to end suffering.
Do you understand this, Buddhists? If we
don't know the cause of suffering and
we think of suffering differently, that's called
wrong view.  Buddhist followers, do you understand this point? For example,
Yen married a husband who constantly
beat her. Yen said, "It's because of
this husband that I'm suffering.
If I had married someone else, I wouldn't be
suffering so much." That's a wrong way of thinking. I have
karmic connections and cause and effect, so I
married this man. I'm being beaten because in my
previous life I lived without
love and compassion for my parents, my
spouse, my children, or all
living beings. That's why I'm being
beaten now. That's having the right view on
cause and effect. As for the right view of
liberation, to achieve that liberation, I
must cultivate the right actions: knowing how to love,
how to care, how to share. That's having the
right view.
That's the right way of thinking. With the right view,
we begin to think right in each
action. For example, have I shown love?
Have I helped? Have I shared? Or have
I just
slapped someone in the mouth? Then I'll be retaliated against,
sowing the seeds of being hit back,
right? That's Yen explaining it so it's
easier to understand.  Let's practice with our Buddhist followers, it's
easy to understand and easy to practice.
And the mindfulness part in the
Eightfold Path is that we have to contemplate the thoughts of
liberation, the thoughts of liberation,
okay? Now I know that we have a
mindset about things like this, like my husband.
Now, if I want to be liberated from
this karma, I have to maintain
my mindfulness, which is the
mindfulness of knowing how to love, how to forgive, how to
share, how to empathize.
The mindfulness of not being cruel, not
beating people without reason, not living
without love, not living
irresponsibly. If I do that, I wo
n't be liberated from my karma.
That is, the right view
is suffering, the cause of suffering, and how to
resolve suffering. But what our suffering is is
still within the right view, but it's
a branch, and this changes continuously
with each thing we encounter.
Each thing we encounter is called a
thought, for example, here there's Hang, for
instance. Hang curses Yen or Hang falsely accuses Yen,
in this thought, Yen just
remembers and thinks about it, Yen has to contemplate.  According to the
concept of liberation, to understand that the concept is
merely remembering, we should
remember our concept of liberation so that
we can act and behave in a way that
liberates our thinking, our speech, and our actions. That is, right view, right thought, right speech, and right
action. Then there's
the main thing, right, which is right
livelihood. Our right livelihood is
doing
good deeds, not killing, not stealing,
not getting drunk or addicted. A lay Buddhist doesn't steal, right? That's
avoiding it, that's living
by the precepts. To make it
easier to understand, we get
good karma. So, as
Buddhists,
we take the precepts as our guiding principle. Buddhists who
haven't yet practiced the precepts are very easy to do. But to practice the precepts,
we must learn to
listen, to think, and to practice
them correctly. Otherwise, it will be
like before, when lay Buddhists forbade
killing and then went on to be vegetarians. Remember
this, it leads to suffering.  Without learning,
we would suffer like this. And then
there's this old man, he's a vegetarian, and his
thinking is like this: "
Ladies, you can't eat cow's milk
because cows are very stupid. Drinking cow's milk
will make you as stupid as a
cow." Then he taught us, and from the beginning, we
hadn't thought about it. We just heard him say, "Yeah, cows are
stupid, so why do humans become
intelligent just by drinking milk?" "But people who eat grass
don't have grass, people who eat vegetables don't have vegetables." "They have
thinking, but if you keep eating them, you'll become unconscious
like vegetables, without any awareness?"
So that's a mistake. Therefore,
we must have thinking. Do you
Buddhist followers understand this point? So when you
listen to people, you must have the right thinking, the
right thinking based on precepts.
We are ignorant, so now we
are blessed to meet the Buddha who has precepts,
so we will use precepts to think.
Do you Buddhist followers understand this? Let's use right view, mindfulness,
mindfulness of precepts. Mindfulness of precepts
so that we can think, so that we can
Is there a fixed principle in the realm called the realm of birth, or the realm of
birth and wisdom? To be sure, right,
dear Buddhist followers? Yen
would like to enter the Dharma and Yen
also respectfully asks the congregation: Is there anyone else with a question?
Just one more question, okay? Ah, you just asked the
second point, right? Okay, okay, I'll
answer your second point.
Your second point was that you were so
busy answering the first point that you forgot
your second point. Let me
remind you of your second point, my dear followers. I
want to ask about dedicating the
merit to... Ah, dedication, I remember now.
Because the two questions are
so different, I was so busy answering...
Oh, without cause and condition, I can't dedicate the merit.
That's just my wish, dear Buddhist followers.
For example, I want to
dedicate this merit to all sentient beings in the
Dharma realm. If it were possible, the Buddha would have
dedicated it all, and wouldn't have been able to dedicate it to us.
That's
just expressing my wish, dear Buddhist followers. And that
also radiates the energy of practice.  My merit is directed
towards this world, that's all, okay? It's
impossible to precisely dedicate merit
to this person or that person. For example, if there
is a saint,
then there are no natural disasters or floods.
That saint is dedicating
their merit, and all the people
around them will benefit from that blessing,
not being affected by natural disasters or floods. Whether they receive
it or not depends
on the nature of that merit, right? That merit
must be the merit of liberation. Only a saint can
possess such merit. It's
not like I'm dedicating
this merit to someone rich or
poor, or someone sick; they have
their own karma, and what I receive is
only a partial response. Sometimes they do
n't receive it because they don't take it. Do you
understand this point? Saints,
because their vow is to save sentient beings,
and the merit and blessings from their
practice of liberation
benefit the world, while
I may not necessarily receive it.  That's it,
but so, if you're going to dedicate the merit,
then you're still dedicating it, whether they
receive it or not depends on them. Let's just
stay in our hearts. But
if we dedicate the merit out of love, and it's
not egalitarian, then they won't receive it,
and sometimes we might even die because of
that love. Have you understood this word clearly? For
example, I only loved one high school friend,
now she's married and suffering so much, so
I'm going to become a monk and I dedicate the merit to her every day,
constantly remembering her. She might
not know if she'll receive it, but I'll die
because of love. Then I won't be able to
sleep peacefully day and night, worrying about
how she is now. I don't see any merit at all, and yet I'm still so attached
to love. So, the monks dedicate the merit to the whole world, not to any one individual. We have this gratitude, this karmic connection, or whatever it is, and only then can we cultivate
our minds to become pure. And then
there's the remaining part: the merit we
dedicate to those who are still alive...
So, whether the living or the
deceased, it's all the same. For example, if
your parents have passed away and you are indebted to them,
you dedicate the merit to them. Whether your parents are
alive or deceased, or if they are
your relatives, that's
clearly a debt of gratitude and obligation. They helped you, and you must
repay that debt. But if it's just out of personal
affection for a male or female friend, or some other random person,
that's not right. But
if it's for those who helped you, then it's okay. It's getting
late now, Yen Trach, here's a
short sutra, a short sutra about the
Buddha. This sutra is very important.
Yen reads the sutra, and we Buddhists
can go to the Ba Vang Temple website, the Dharma section, to listen to the
detailed teachings of the Master.
But Yen only focuses on what is suitable for us Buddhists. If we
have any questions or concerns, Yen will interpret them accordingly. This is the
Dharma that the Perfectly Enlightened Buddha
preached.  "What is that like?"
asked the monk Naxian. "The Dharma that the Buddha taught is the Dharma that the Ten-
Power Wisdom has expounded. Whoever hears and practices
that Dharma correctly attains that Dharma
and is called a Shravaka disciple of the Buddha. And whoever
sees that Dharma sees the Buddha." The
king replied, "Is that so? How did the
Buddha teach?" Naxian answered, "The Buddha himself
taught it. Whoever sees the Dharma sees the
Tathagata. Whoever sees the Tathagata sees the Dharma. And then that person will no longer have doubts or ask questions about Nirvana, about the Buddha's embodiment, about his virtues, wisdom, and supreme excellence." The
king replied, "I also hope
so, but please do not scold me
like that." Naxian replied, "I would not dare."
In this sutra, the
Buddha Naxian clearly stated, "
Whoever sees the Dharma sees the Tathagata. Whoever sees the
Tathagata sees the Dharma." But currently, there
may be
extreme practices, such as
daily worship of the Buddha, thinking that one will
see the Buddha, that one will dream of seeing the Buddha.
Seeing the image of Buddha is also called seeing
Buddha; only then can it be called seeing
Buddha. Yesterday, I dreamt
of Buddha. Yesterday, I dreamt of the
image of Buddha, and that's correct. If you didn't see
Buddha, then it's not quite right. To see Buddha,
to see the Dharma, that is, to see the
Tathagata, that is, to see Buddha. So, if we want to see Buddha, we should continue reading this section, and then we should continue reading this section. At that time, that person will no longer doubt or question Nirvana, the embodiment of Buddha, virtue,
wisdom, and His supreme and ultimate victory. Your Majesty,
before,
we debated whether
Buddha was real or not. Is Buddha real or not real, or is
Buddha a fictional character? That is, during my practice, I had questions and I pondered whether Buddha was real
or not, or whether there was a Buddha. At
that time, I pondered and answered
myself like this: whoever has
such teachings, I will call that person a
Buddha. Because no ordinary person can have them.  Is
it possible to utter
such words? If
we read the Buddha's teachings, we will
no longer doubt the Buddha, my dear fellow practitioners.
Therefore, whoever reads the Buddha
's teachings, sees His wisdom, and
realizes that no scholar or scientist in this world
can
research the words that the
Buddha spoke, then we will
no longer doubt the existence of the Buddha, right? We will not
doubt the existence of the Buddha because
these words are written by humans,
not by humans. If
someone can utter such things, it is
truly
unimaginable; knowing
everything like this, that person is called a
Buddha. And how can we not
doubt the Buddha and see the Buddha? We
must practice the Buddha's teachings to overcome our
doubts, right? Overcoming doubt
because we overcome doubt about Nirvana.
Nirvana is stillness, that's all, the
stillness of the mind, that's all. So,
can we experience Nirvana
after something happens
to us? We take the Buddha's teachings,
contemplate, and we are freed from it.  When
that restless thought reaches a state of calm,
tranquility, and liberation, we will
experience Nirvana.
Have you ever experienced that? It does
n't exist. For
example, Yen Dang, or Sister Hue, was very angry, very upset.
Then Yen contemplated that feeling, and that
anger disappeared. See? That means liberation, and
a state of profound stillness, like at the
beginning when nothing happened. That means understanding
through the Buddha's teachings. For example, Sister Hue, or Yen, Yen
contemplated cause and effect, right? She contemplated
everything, and her mind became
calm again, not seeing the person cursing, not
seeing the person receiving the curse, and went to a
normal state without obstacles. The mind
returned to its initial state of calm.
That state is the result of
liberation. Anyone
can experience a small part of
Nirvana, and I believe Nirvana is real. It exists in a
state where the mind is free from greed, anger, and delusion,
becomes clear and insightful, and sees clearly
all things and their causes. If
ignorance and lack of understanding arise,
then that person will attain
Nirvana.  We understand it this way, and
we will attain enlightenment little by little through
our mind. This mind is liberated,
this mind is liberated, gradually, each thought of anger is liberated,
liberated, liberated, liberated. Gradually, it
comes to liberation, right? It's like a pile of
examples called a pile of greed and anger. It's like
this: someone shaves a little today,
but don't shave again tomorrow. If you keep shaving,
it will never reach enlightenment.
But we still know the feeling of being
shaved, and we still know how high or low it is, right? We
still know, but it's
not attainment. But it's an
experience, so if anyone
practices the Buddha's teachings, they won't doubt the Buddha,
won't doubt Nirvana, because they have
experienced a part of Nirvana. So, not doubting the
Buddha—do you feel
happy? So
here, I'm moving on to not doubting the teacher, not doubting friends,
not doubting the
teacher and friends. Let's
practice the teacher's teachings and see if we
benefit, right? From not doubting the
Buddha, we don't doubt the teacher and not doubting
friends. Let's practice the teachings of our friends and see if our friends
try to trick us.  You think
you're a bad person, don't you, dear Buddhist?
You say that if I follow your advice, it will bring
me suffering, and you're a bad person. But if
this person advises me, even if I don't know,
I still have faith and follow their advice. If I
see happiness in those things, then I
have to say that's a good person, right, dear
Buddhist? So here, I don't
doubt the Buddha, I don't doubt the Dharma, and now, what does Yen mean?
This is seeing the Buddha as a
way of knowing myself, not
doubting the teacher, not doubting the friend. The teacher says that if
I practice these things, I will be
happy and liberated in my heart. I will be
liberated in my heart, no longer
worried, thinking, or feeling sorrowful about
this issue. When I practice, I see that my heart is
liberated, I live a more virtuous life,
I love others more, I
share more easily, and whoever helps me achieve
that is a good friend. But if I live
with a friend whose heart flares up with
anger after a conversation, and then gets even
angrier, right? That's not good, it's not good. Then I'll go
to a teacher
who advises me, and after a while, I'll
only do things that involve killing and harming living beings.  If
someone lies to me, they will suffer a lot of karmic consequences,
so I won't follow the
teacher. That's how I resolve my
doubts about the teacher and my friend. This is
how I resolve my doubts, that's how I resolve my doubts about the Buddha.
So, this is how I resolve my doubts about the
teacher. Therefore, I think that if I want to see the
teacher, I must practice the
teacher's teachings. I don't doubt my friend's advice and
opinions; if I think they are right,
I will practice.
My friend and I will always be together, and
my teacher will always be a close disciple
beside him. Whatever he teaches, I listen. When I
practice, am I close to the teacher? Do I
see the teacher? Because whenever the teacher teaches
this, the teacher is always in my
head, right? The Buddha is in my head, how can I
say I don't see him? Of course I
see him clearly. So, if I want to see the teacher, if I
want to see the Buddha, I must practice the
Buddha's teachings. If I want to see the teacher, I must
practice the teacher's instructions according to the Buddha's
teachings. Because it's the Buddha's teachings, but it's
also suitable for my temple, right? It's
suitable for my temple, for example,
my temple has certain things
that are...  Children, let me give you an example. At the beginning of
the year, the teacher told us, "You should go... (illegible) ...  That's
right, that shows a lack of
critical thinking and discernment, not listening at all. Listening to
others has already shaken you.
Yen would like to conclude this Dharma discussion here. Yen
also wants to inform you all that
because there are so
many questions, Yen will answer them
in other sessions. Yen will
announce the answers online, and Buddhist practitioners from all Dharma
centers will gather to
listen. I respectfully request that you all
clasp your hands in
prayer and
dedicate
this merit
to all
disciples and sentient beings, that they may all
attain Buddhahood. May you all
depart peacefully
and joyfully.